so uh welcome to this presentation on
space repetition
um i'm really glad that there are a
bunch of people who are interested in
this
uh because uh you know me and xander
we're really into space repetition uh
we're kind of nerdy about it
and any opportunity we get to do a
presentation like this is a
like a good day for us thanks for coming
and
um yeah like i said the talk was a
little bit dry with just me and the
slides it felt like
like a lecture or something so i brought
in my magnificent californian pal
to spice things up a little bit make it
a little bit more conversational
hopefully
more interesting for you the viewers i
just want to say thanks really quickly
to all
the organizers as well because um i
don't know the obsidian community is
worthy of some sort of like case study
in a community organization or something
like that because uh everything was just
uh really well organized so
thank you to everyone who was
responsible for that
um so firstly who are we my name's james
um you can find me on twitter at experia
learning and i also have a youtube
channel
experimental learning where um i talk
about things like space repetition
incremental reading i have a little bit
on obsidian and stuff like that
and then zander you can find him on
twitter at
zdrks and we also have this uh
quite geeky nerdy podcast called golden
nuggets podcast where we talk about
space repetition systems and things like
that
so let's get into it um the reason we
decided to make this
whole uh space repetition presentation
was because there's a bunch of like
growing interest
in space repetition from the personal
knowledge management systems
communities including obsidian and rome
noticed that recently there's like i
wrote this uh plugin
and while i was writing the plugin i was
looking at other plugins and i saw that
there were multiple
spaced repetition plugins available for
obsidian which is really cool
and in the discord there's always these
questions about whether to use space
repetition or not
how to use it alongside settle custom
systems and stuff
there were these cool videos as well and
xander i think you've used like the
plugins for rome and stuff as well right
uh yes i've used them a little bit and
of course when you're working in a
system like this the plug-ins are
always going to be somewhat limited but
there are a ton of powerful
possibilities so yeah i've used them
right right so all of this basically
just points towards
this exponential adoption of space
repetition that we've been seeing
um over the past few years especially uh
which
piotr wozniak the inventor of space
repetition has written about in this
article
in 2018 you should go and check out if
you're interested in it
um so what is space repetition
um essentially it's this algorithm
invented by
piotr wozniak and it basically intends
to solve the problem of forgetting
so what's the problem of forgetting um
very simply explained it's that feeling
you got when you're at school
if you went to school that is that um uh
during the semester you'd learn all of
this stuff
and then um as soon as you got to the
summer holidays
your knowledge that you acquired during
the semester would just decay
and by the next semester you'd require
all of these like refresher classes just
to
um gain back all of that acquired
knowledge that you'd lost over the
summer
and actually this is kind of a
ubiquitous process because xander you
didn't go to school right
um but yeah i imagine that you still
face this problem
is that correct oh yeah absolutely
that's why
when i was a kid like 12 13 years old i
was extremely bothered by this
like i would try to read and then i
would recognize like i'm forgetting
everything
and it felt like kind of a waste of time
for me so that's how i discovered anki
and stuff like that when i was
quite young exactly so this whole space
repetition thing
the whole point of it is to calculate
these optimum intervals between
active recall repetitions to maximize
your memory
stabilization basically what i'm talking
about here is that
um by actively recalling information
this uh produces a memory effect that
strengthens the memory
um so it persists longer in your memory
before it needs to be repeated again and
by
sort of abusing this memory principle
you can
um retain a kind of a staggering amount
of information in your memory
for very low costs over a lifetime and
so that's the whole
thing that the space repetition
algorithm is optimizing for
its whole goal is to maximize retention
of knowledge and minimize the cost in
terms of time
from repeating this information right
so here's an example of some of the
things that you'll be repeating
this is how you do the active recall in
space repetition systems
you basically have a question which is
like a prompt for example here i have a
very simple example just a language
learning
question it's telling me to actively
recall from my memory
uh how to say memories in chinese right
and over here i have a slightly more
interesting one
which is asking about um but what
bertrand russell thought um
about uh mathematical systems and like
what what what about a mathematical
system was like a kiss of death
so it's a more interesting item you
don't just have to have these very
simple
a to b associations between um
language learning uh items uh you can
also have
almost like metaphorical uh conceptual
based
uh questions as well right xander like
there's a huge
uh sort of variety in there and the
types of items you can have
absolutely and that's i i think this is
such a core point and
it's good that you're introducing this
so early on if you guys haven't used
space repetition before oftentimes what
people tend to use it for
is what they refer to as facts and
figures or these kinds of things
and it is very useful for those things
if you employ it well
but it's useful for conceptual ideas and
these kinds of things
but people are in my view a little bit
too close minded about where these
space repetition prompts can apply and
you can use them in your own creative
work
you can use them for personal
development you can use them to
think about you know memories from your
own life or refresh things or
perform tasks or advance a project or
or figure something new out anything
like this you can
you can use them for all kinds of things
and it's important
that that serves as the basis of
someone's understanding
of the space repetition prompt it's not
just
for facts and figures it's essentially
as
andy matushak would describe it i don't
know if you guys have heard of him but
if you haven't
it's worth looking his stuff up but he
describes space repetition props as
essentially a micro task for yourself
and it can be
anything essentially the scheduling is
what matters
and the the micro task of it sometimes
you'll be recalling a fact
sometimes you'll be generating a
creative idea about a particular thing
and so forth so i think that's a crucial
part exactly yeah
you describe that really well yeah so
and then that was the question side and
here's the answer side this is the part
you're actively recalling and then
giving yourself a grade
uh to determine um the next
interval of the uh question so when it
will be shown to you next if you
if you were able to recall it very
easily you'll get a much longer interval
because it
signifies that the memory was stronger
so you need you don't need to
uh repeat it um that soon you can wait
for a longer period of time
and then repeat it so then you see that
there's an optimization there
where you're you're not wasting time
reviewing information you already know
um because it's already stored in your
memory you don't need to review it you
only spend time
reviewing those uh repetitions that are
the most difficult the ones you struggle
with the most right
yeah and also it's it's important to
note the longer the interval
the more the the storage strength
so to say of the memory is increase that
successful review
right and so one of the corollaries of
that is that you if you review too often
sometimes you'll find that the memory
doesn't last very long
yeah like an example that i've observed
like just in ordinary life people tend
to notice this if you binge watch a tv
show
particularly one with a lot of
characters people tend to forget all the
names of the
characters whereas if you had been
watching it week to week for eight years
you wouldn't forget the names because
you've had a much longer time
to review those names so people kind of
know this intuitively not only does long
intervals strengthen it
but short intervals weaken it yeah
that's a very good point i like the
example
and it's kind of couch intuitive because
you'd think that reviewing
something just constantly throughout the
day that would make
something uh very easily retrievable for
you and it would strengthen the memory
but that's
that's simply not the case and you can
make an analogy there between
like um memory systems like space
repetition
and like bodybuilding like if you want
to become a bodybuilder
uh one of the first things you learn is
like you need to rest
rest is like a really important part of
the whole training thing you can't just
do bicep curls
constantly all day and expect to get
jacked right
exactly yeah it's certainly a through
line in biological systems like
there needs to be some some development
across time
and you can't just bunch it all together
and expect the same results
precisely so i just wanted i couldn't
help but include this because i thought
it was cool it's like
an example of uh was his early
experiments piotr wozniak's early
experiments into
um space repetition and uh this is space
repetition on paper from the 1980s
so he'd have his um english words
on the left polish uh
words on the right and then he'd cover
over the english and answer what the
polish was
or vice versa and crucially he would
also record the repetition history so he
he even had like a paper database of all
the repetitions he'd done over time
which was um which became a really
important part of determining the
optimum interval
so uh yeah quite interesting
this man changed the world with his
meticulousness he did it
absolutely it is insane
he's such a he's such a careful picture
anyway
yeah exactly um so yeah the whole
problem of forgetting thing that we just
mentioned
uh the ubiquitous problem of forgetting
was uh the impetus for
pyotr wozniak to um come up with this
whole space repetition idea
he got really fed up with the
never-ending process of forgetting he
wanted to learn biochemistry and
physiology
and he would read books make notes and
it would all be for nothing due to the
process of forgetting
and yeah it truly is ubiquitous because
all memories are subject to forgetting
even the ones
um where you might feel like you'd be
able to remember them for a lifetime
even those are subject to forgetting
they can all be that forgetting process
can all be shown basically on this very
simple graph
for a simple um a single memory
on the first day where you learn
something day zero uh
the chance of recalling it is going to
be very high close to
100 um on the day that you first learn
something but
over time over the subsequent days the
strength of that memory is slowly going
to decline decline decline decline until
it reaches a certain point
at which um retrieval is going to be
very improbable
and unlikely and at that point you can
say it's been forgotten
um so to give you an example of uh you
know
the ubiquitousness of this forgetting
process like
i know especially as a programmer i know
that there are programmers listening to
this as well so you can probably relate
like
often when i'm just sitting in bed and i
i'll come up with like either an idea or
a solution to some bug that i've got in
one of my programs
and often i assume that since i've come
up with that insight
i've now got that insight i've achieved
it and now i've got it for life
but then you know as early as the very
next day it's just
disappeared straight into the abyss
never to be found again and it's
impossible
to reactivate those brain states to just
achieve that idea that insight again so
um it's it's counterintuitive um and
we have this sort of bias where we think
we will remember things but we just
simply can't
absolutely this is such a key insight
because
people sort of recognize intuitively
like we've talked about
that they forget things they've learned
yeah but
something that is more counterintuitive
is the fact that you'll forget your own
ideas
and your own opinions and how you form
those opinions
it's like i have an opinion about x and
it's my opinion
i thought of it i used my brain and my
network of knowledge and opinions
to make a new opinion therefore i won't
forget it but it
is simply untrue like you're using
source material
you're like you say even just a raw idea
about something that you know well there
is no guarantee in fact
it's almost a guarantee that you will
forget it if you don't write it down
and so that's just a side point if you
have an idea write it down immediately
because something was says
wozniak i apologize in the community
everybody calls him waz
but anyway um yeah something he says is
if you don't write your ideas down
immediately the memory of it
you start to just remember that you had
to write about a subject
not even that you had to write about the
particular idea so
it starts dwindling immediately and if
you can have a piece of paper or a
computer or an iphone or something
to to capture your ideas immediately
that's
always ideal but anyway the key insight
is that nothing is exempt
from forgetting exactly um but while
we're talking about the problem of
forgetting i think it's important to
note that
this problem is also the key behind the
brain's greatest power which is
generalization so we wouldn't want to
get rid of forgetting altogether
um you know generalization the ability
to
uh see instances uh of like observed
data in the world
and take their similarities uh forget
their differences and combine them into
a more abstract representation like a
concept that's
key in abstract thinking which powers
all of science and mathematics so
if we were to get rid of forgetting all
together was has this quote the brain
would be as dumb as a tape recorder
simply just recording all of the
data into the scene without
generalization right so
we don't want to get rid of it
altogether um but i don't think that's a
concern i don't think that would even be
possible anyway so
yeah there's some people with that weird
disease hyperthymesia i think it's
called
right yeah it tends to be quite an
unpleasant
experience from what i understand yeah
yeah yeah there are some things that you
you would rather forget not even just
for the sake of generalization
right you don't want to constantly have
memories
in the same level of fidelity as as the
original event
so anyway that's very true yeah so
here's a really snappy history of the
space repetition uh development there
were contributions from a bunch of
scientists
everyone's probably probably heard of
ebbinghaus in 1885 he showed that memory
could be studied scientifically
and then between 1885 and um
1985 when was did his sorry wasn't the
activities first attempts to measure the
optimum interval
the the principle of space repetition
was
sort of invented and then forgotten uh
ironically
uh repeatedly um by multiple people and
it was really until it was until 100
years after ebbinghaus that
wozniak attempted to measure the optimum
interval by
investigating the impact of repeated
review that this is an important point
like
um what happens to the forgetting curve
for memories
when you repeat the review over time and
when should you optimally space the
reviews to maximize
this memory effect the flattening of the
curve that allows the memory to persist
in memory
over time um so
this is an important an important
insight there just real quick is that
ebbinghaus
and maybe you'll maybe you'll touch on
it here but ebbinghaus did a lot of
experiments with
essentially nonsense syllables and a lot
of space repetition
research even today is centered around
this
cramming nonsense information into
people's brains
and seeing how long that lasts but the
crucial insight
at least in terms of determining the
optimum interval
is the recognition that coherent
information
information you understand is forgotten
much more slowly than nonsense and
people know that
intuitively of course so anyway that's
that's one of the key insights there
yeah that's such an important point if i
just go
back here like the forgetting curve i
think ebbinghaus didn't actually draw
the curve he just had tables of data but
when you construct the curve that
ebbinghaus had from remembering these
nonsense syllables just like random
strings of letters it would have been
much more precipitous
of a decline you know the memory would
have declined
much more quickly because it's not being
attached to anything coherent in your
stored in your prior knowledge right so
it might have been the case that
you know ebbinghaus was close to
creating space repetition but
he saw the precipitousness of the
decline he thought oh there's no point
it's just hopeless
we're always going to be screwed by this
uh
problem of forgetting but uh so there
you go
learn only coherent information if you
want to change
the world exactly don't learn if you
don't understand
there you go that's right exactly
so this uh wozniak's research
it culminated in this serrated set of
forgetting cars i think this is a pretty
classic image because when you search
for
space repetition this is like the number
one that comes up and just as a side
point it comes from a very very good
article by gary wolfe in wired
magazine called want to remember
everything you'll ever learn surrender
to this algorithm and that's like the
number one introduction to peel to
wozniak and space repetition that i'd
recommend because it's entertaining it's
interesting
gives you a look at the life of a very
wacky scientist
so go and read that after this
presentation if you're interested but
what it demonstrates is the magical
property of human memory
wherein memories last longer with each
repetition so
you can see the decline uh the decay and
the strength of the memory is very fast
to begin with at the first
repetition and then you know with a
second repetition
you have more time where you can
retrieve it uh
and then that just extends over time
with each repetition
and it keeps extending to the point
where you can actually create memories
that will outlive you so let's say
you're like 60 years old
it's possible that you could have a
piece of knowledge stored in your
collection of um q a cards
that has an optimum interval of like 60
years so double your lifetime
so it's likely to just persist for the
rest of your life until you die
unless you live to 120 i guess you're
very healthy
so in this sense you can redefine space
repetition as like the most effective
way to get memories to enter this
permanent store
where you don't even need to repeat them
anymore they just stay there
and that's a really interesting and
beautiful thought and um
uh it's actually possible to achieve
this for a staggering
number of question answer pairs
staggering amount of knowledge so
um i can't remember the exact numbers
oh go ahead go ahead yeah i well
actually i think i can guess what you're
going to say something about
the number of reps or something like
this i was going to say like the number
that's possible to maintain your memory
is like around 300 000 i think
was uh wasn't it yeah i i think that's
what what wasn't
stated before but i just wanted to
mention this is ridiculously efficient
like
you once you try this you won't even
believe how efficient it is
there's basically the the limiter on it
is not the number of items that you can
store in your memory or review
because you can't possibly make
enough items like it's it's hard to
conceptualize
before you've tried this but making
enough items
on a daily basis consistently enough
that you'll ever hit 300 000 is
basically a fantasy like that'll never
happen
almost you know what i mean that would
require extraordinary
consistency and dedication maybe a few
people in the world have a life set up
that would that would provide that but
it is ridiculously efficient
and you won't believe how much you can
remember this way
especially and and james kind of showed
a couple of screenshots from supermemo
supermemo 18
the latest one is running an algorithm
that is
at this moment proprietary it was
invented by by wozniak
as all of the currently used at least
the popular
space repetition algorithms were for
example anki runs on
sm2 and most implementations of that
uh most implementations of space
repetition run on sm-2
which was invented in i don't know 95 or
something
but super mario 18 was
created in 2018 2019 something like this
and it's efficiency and its algorithm
growth over time
is remarkable so it's uh hyper efficient
and you won't believe it yeah so we're
talking like about
300 000 question answer pairs which
sounds like a lot but
from day to day uh even if you let's say
a hundred thousand
um because i do know a couple of people
who have uh reached that amount of items
they're only doing like 10 to 20 minutes
of repetitions per day
they're not like crushed under this huge
workload
like you see with the medical school
anki people and
uh people studying for example for
jeopardy and stuff like that they're not
doing
hours and hours per day they're
literally just doing 10 to 20 minutes
but they've been doing it over
decades so the workload is very low
yep exactly so that uh what we showed
there just before the serrated set of
forgetting curves that
uh basically refers to a single memory
let's uh consider what it means
across your entire knowledge base all of
the knowledge you have so
without rep space repetition you hit
basically this unavoidable plateau
because of the problem of forgetting
um at a certain point the rate of
learning new knowledge this rate of
acquisition gets balanced by the
rate of forgetting and so you just reach
this plateau where it's very difficult
to
move beyond because the more you learn
the more you forget the more you have to
review
and so just without space repetition
without um
reviewing things in an optimal manner it
becomes very difficult to move beyond
a certain point but as soon as you have
the space repetition algorithm and you
apply it and you review
the knowledge according to an optimum
schedule
it basically allows you to eliminate or
minimize let's say the
the downward force of forgetting and
at this point the limiting factors
become
how well are you able to acquire
knowledge not how well are you able to
retain it
knowledge is being retained because
you're using space repetition so now you
can focus on
uh the acquisition part where there are
a bunch of interesting factors for
example xander you're interested in
formulation the formulation of items how
you
um syntactically structure your cards
how you
arrange them that's going to play a big
role
a much more significant role once you're
using space repetition because
uh now you're focused on acquisition
yeah exactly and people view what you're
talking about this this term formulation
it's essentially just how your flash
cards are written people view that
as just like a natural thing like oh i
want to remember this fact so it'll be
obvious
how to structure that into a flashcard
it's not obvious
and especially if you want to do it in a
way that
matches the way that the brain works and
what will be optimal for your memory
it's quite a difficult thing to master
so it's it's
uh it's an important topic but anyway
yes this
this concept what you're talking about
here not only
does it allow you to learn more over
your lifetime because
you're not having to combat your
forgetting with new learning
all the time but also if you if you look
at how you understand something new and
how you learn something new
it's always based on prior knowledge and
understanding
and so the more things you remember the
more things you have in your memory bank
the easier time you'll have solving a
new problem or understanding a new thing
and so therefore it it changes the
structure it changes the shape
of the problems you can solve and the
things you can learn as
you add more knowledge to your to your
memory so
that's an important point and it also
relates to this idea that
that i'm sure we'll touch on later but
people talk about how
all you really need is essentially
access to a personal wiki or something
like this like obsidian
and therefore it all works fine because
you have this interlinked network and
all these kinds of things
but to me that is not that is obviously
not
and i apologize for saying obvious i
understand
why somebody would think differently in
this way but
to me that can't be the case you need
knowledge in your memory to make
use of it if you want to come up with a
new idea that can only happen
if you know two seemingly disparate
pieces of information are in your brain
at once
in such a way that they can be connected
in a new way so
i think having the knowledge in your
brain cannot be replaced
by these uh networks or these back
linked
you know xenocasting systems yeah yeah
actually that that leads in quite well
to this slide which is
on why memory so what we've discussed so
far is the possibility of memorization
memorization is made possible
uh through this space repetition
algorithm but we didn't really
we touched on briefly like why you would
want to do this
what what's the whole purpose or of
doing it what benefits can it give you
and so let's talk about some common
misconceptions that people have
of memorization the first one that i
hear a lot is that
memorization is just learning by rote i
also hear a lot that
i don't forget things that i've
understood i think we talked about that
earlier
memorization is useless for stem like
mathematics
scientific subjects and stuff like that
and then the one that you just touched
on is under
google obsidian rome note cake note
taking etc
uh they make memorization obsolete so in
the next few slides um right
we're just going to address these
misconceptions i think one by one
so to begin with um there's a
misconception that memorization is just
learning by rote
um but i think this uh is kind of
confused because
uh memorization actually supports
associative memory which is like the
the whole thing that underlies the most
desirable operations of the human mind
things like problem solving and
creativity
by memorizing um facts knowledge
interesting pieces of uh information uh
what you're doing is
acquiring the building blocks for uh
your associative memory to create
connections between those building
blocks
and create new novel information
and by creating something new uh novel
and that hopefully has
uh utility uh what you're doing is
uh something creative you're creating
something that no one else has created
so i think what people do is they
confuse
um memorization and learning by rote
uh because they think that people are
learning things that are just useful
are useless rather useless trivia things
like learning the world's capitals pub
quiz knowledge
but um by learning like highly
applicable
abstract fundamental knowledge what you
gain is the ability for your
associative memory to make these very
valuable
useful connections that can actually
result in uh
interesting research inventions
business ideas in the real world things
that can actually have an effect in the
real world
absolutely and it's just so
if you think about this for a little
while you'll observe that
any any problem solving that you do in
your day-to-day life
or any creative thought that you have
it's all made possible by the existence
of
prior knowledge and understanding and
concepts that you built up
through learning and forgetting over
time so it's
it this is the core thing you cannot
solve problems
that are related to something like try
being a programmer
when you don't actually know anything
like you're cons
you're googling literally everything
yeah you can do some stuff
but your problem solving capacity is
extremely limited
i'm not saying to memorize all the
syntax and all the
all the api operations i'm not saying
that i'm just saying
you need to understand the basic
concepts you need to have those
concepts in your memory so you can
deploy them
where they are needed and this idea that
you can just google it or you can just
look it up in your
zeta constant it is total it's a
fabrication
it's not true yeah i think i'll talk
about this in the
next slide yeah the importance of memory
for creativity
uh and problem solving as well what you
require for
those sorts of operations is like a
fluid access to
memories that are stored internally um
you can't be just like googling things
in the middle of having an idea it's too
slow you need that
fast uh fluid connections between
ideas stored in your mind and you also
need large amounts of
like abstract inference rules that you
can use to combine these pieces of
knowledge and move from a to b in
problem solving and stuff like that
um so yeah like two facts stored in the
human memory can instantly be put
together and bring a new idea to life
but facts that are just sitting in your
obsidian vault
um they remain useless until you connect
them inside your mind
it has to be an internal process uh at
least now i mean we could in the future
have
uh ais with creative minds right but at
least
uh for the for the present moment the
human mind is the only uh the only thing
that can do this
right now
and also i've seen some videos of some
um crows
they can solve problems as well
creatively
[Laughter]
yeah the final interesting point about
human creativity is that a lot of it is
unconscious
so i'm not sure about i couldn't
tell you about like the proportion uh
like how much of your creativity
is just happening in the background
while you sleep or why you'll not even
consciously think about it and how much
is conscious
um but i would wager that most of it is
happening while you're unconscious
so that is a huge amount of time
where your brain is just making trying
to make
connections by searching through your
memories and trying to find
interesting connections to make
and if if you're not focusing on
uh your internal memory and storing
things storing interesting things in
your memory you're really gonna
hinder that process i think because it's
because it's unconscious it's not like
you have access to your obsidian
volt or personal knowledge management
system while that process is taking
place it has to take place internally
inside the mind
right yeah you need to be able to plug a
usb drive with your city involved right
into the back of your skull
exactly yeah you can process those files
we need the neuralink uh
plugin as soon as possible
asap please someone do it thank you elon
come on
so here's like a quick diagram just to
sum up
what i mean um about sort of focusing on
the internal memory rather than
separating your internal memory from
your external store of
information and interesting notes and
stuff like that this is what it looks
like with the xettlecastle approach and
obviously
this is just uh just a this is a
generalization because obviously when
you're using your setup custom
some of it is going to get retained in
your memory obviously
it's just not systematic i think that's
the difference it's not systematically
trying to
compute optimum intervals and everything
like that to optimize for
storing useful information in your mind
it just happens incidentally um
and so the difference with an srs is
that everything is
set up in a way to optimize for this
process to make it as smooth as possible
the internal memory is given priority of
everything
else and you know the external storage
linking
doing backlinks and stuff while that is
useful and it does have a place i'm
certainly not saying that it's uh
useless or anything like that
it's just that the srs doesn't focus on
that at all it focuses 100
on storing things into your mind
yeah absolutely and and there's a great
interplay between these things
if if that's because like we talked
about
actually first of all i just want to say
i think there may be a typo for the word
zeddle cats in the previous slide oh
sorry
anyway that's right i just want to
notice
uh anyway um like we talked about
now that you can essentially remember
anything anything that you learn
the bottleneck is like well
there's open questions which is like
what should i
learn what should i remember how do i
understand things better
so that i can capture that understanding
in a set of space repetition prompts
these kinds of things and this is where
the zero customer can have a perfect
role in this so you you use the
zettelkasin and the notes
to develop your understanding connect
ideas together
and then whatever falls out of that
whatever ideas whatever understanding
whatever whatever it is you can then
capture that in a set of spatial
petition prompts
just so that you don't forget it so that
you have it in the mind so that you can
build on it creatively
these kinds of things so the interplay
between them
can be just absolutely perfect
and i i think that's such a worthwhile
thing yeah i really like that point it
comes back to what we were saying
earlier
it seems silly to say that it's
worthwhile to remember your own ideas
but it really is you know to memorize
your own ideas it's very useful and
exactly you can generate new insights
based on your old insights and develop
them over time
it's a it's a very uh worthwhile
approach
for sure i think this is the last slide
and it doesn't
oh sorry go ahead go ahead oh i'll just
say this real quick
your zero gas is not limited to to like
original ideas that are your own it
it can be like written in your own words
an idea that you're trying to learn
about and then you can use that
understanding that you've built
and make spaceship petition prompts to
maintain that understanding so
it's not only for your own ideas but
that certainly is a core component of it
anyway go ahead about this
yeah this is just the final slide and i
think it basically says
um what i said in the slide about
creativity it's just that
efficient problem solving as well
depends on you having a large
base of uh knowledge and also these
abstract
inference rules to connect that
knowledge together and uh allow you to
solve problems to go from a to b
um so it just seems that um
by memorizing things you can maximize
the potential for your associative
memory
to make new connections and all of those
things
um uh that that that
increasing your ability for your
associative memory to make connections
uh is good for all of those valuable
operations of the human brain that we
really want to promote like creativity
uh problem solving um coming up with new
ideas making new associate
associations and so on um and so yeah
that's the final slide and
just at the end i wanted to put a couple
of uh
recommendations for further reading
number one would definitely be that
article uh by gary wolfe um in wired
want to remember everything you'll ever
learn surrenders to this algorithm it's
great
again i think i mentioned it earlier but
uh yeah it's just a great look
into the life of a wacky scientist and
uh talks a lot about the algorithms into
the life of an absurdly dedicated man
yeah yeah exactly and then secondly
i couldn't do a presentation relating to
super memory and space repetition
without recommending supermemory.guru
which is
uh pyotr wozniak's wiki his main wiki
he's got a few but
this is the main one with a bunch of
information about space repetition
and uh it's like the bible of space
repetition i guess and it's even got
stuff about
uh sleep creativity uh school system
uh diet everything everything really
yeah exactly it's like his whole
philosophy and
yeah it's his public imagine if if he
just made his obsidian vault public he
doesn't use obsidian he's
or a supermodel for this but yeah it's
just a public version of
his own ideas developing and they're not
only about
space or position and learning but
they're about like
diet or the school system or what
happens to your eyes if you wear glasses
or like these kinds of things barefoot
running
yeah exactly exactly and then finally if
you're like more
academically oriented um you should
check out
gwen's space repetition literature
review which goes over all of the
academic papers
although i will say that um i think we
briefly mentioned this earlier a lot of
the space repetition papers
aren't that interesting because they
focus on memorizing uh
either it will be language learning
stuff or stuff that's as close to
nonsense syllables ebbinghaus nonsense
syllables as possible which just makes
for very dry reading it's not that
interesting
um i think was has some stuff on the
theoretical side of
space repetition as well if that
interests you but we can give further
recommendations if you ask in the
discussion
um as well but yeah i think that pretty
much sums it up xander do you have
anything else you want to say or
no yeah i think that's great and i
definitely recommend that
gwen article even if even if you're not
too interested in reading the
papers themselves gwen does an excellent
job as he always does
you know putting that stuff together and
adding some commentary so it's
easier to get the bigger picture without
doing the work yourself so i highly
recommend
that article yes all right i think that
pretty much sums it up
thanks for listening and uh we can do
like a discussion now if you want
and uh yeah any questions you have feel
free to post them
sorry drop my rock thank you
that was really interesting um
personally you guys have
converted me i'm gonna try this out by
myself
oh wonderful yeah like i
i was on the side that i don't have to
like remember lots of facts and figures
i've got more like more abstract
stuff that i have to work on so i didn't
think that needs us but
like you make very interesting points
i'm going to try this now
awesome really glad to hear that so
thank you guys for doing this
presentation
um we're going to have this discussion
now
so anyone can post questions in the chat
and if you are comfortable you can turn
on your mic
and or camera to ask the question
i've got a question or two questions
actually
um one is you know what exact
tools do you use to do this um like what
software tools or whatever and
secondly um i take in
an enormous amount of information every
day
um like i sleep four hours in 24
and the other 20 are probably just
taking information because i never watch
television
so the difficulty for me would be
choosing
what to actually put into space
repetition
this is a problem i've had in the past
like what are
with all this you know fire hose of
information that's coming in
you know how do you choose what you're
actually
um you know putting onto enki cards or
you know however you're doing this
um yeah so i'll answer for myself and
then and then james can go and i'll take
him in reverse
so in terms of what to
put into the system i would say a lot of
it comes from experience
which is to say if you put in a bunch of
items
over time you'll realize like oh i
didn't really make use of those
and then you can use that new
information
and your brain will build some kind of
generalized pattern
of what it looks like when you're trying
to make an item or a prompt out of
out of information that's really not
going to be useful to you in the longer
term so a lot of it is
just getting experience over time and
creating
way too many prompts and then over time
you realize like oh that was useful i
didn't
i didn't ever make use of that and so
you you titrate it that way
but also another piece of it is a
deliberate focus on
applicability which is to say like
is this going to affect my day-to-day
life will i employ this information in
my work
or for some creative project or whatever
it is and so it's those kinds of things
and one of the shortcuts to to improving
the average
applicability of your prompts is to make
prompts
out of learning that you've done
for a particular project so if you need
some information
about some subject for something you're
trying to understand or
a new type of coding project you're
trying to take on or something like this
you can then make prompts from that so
not only
because you know they're they're going
to be useful because they already have
been so
that that is automatically a shortcut
to getting to a better quality of item
so those are the two points that i would
say just try and
think to yourself all the time am i
going to use this what's the
applicability of this
am i just hoarding the knowledge for the
sake of it i know a lot of people have
that mindset of like
i'll just remember every every single
thing i come across which
is it's really a waste of time just
because something's
interesting doesn't mean it's worth
remembering and over time i think you'll
develop an intuition for that
unfortunately i'm not sure how to how to
get that up front or if it's even
possible but i do know that
keeping these certain principles in mind
of you know project-based learning and
maintaining a focus on applicability
stuff like that those can be
great tools there and then the first
question in terms of what i use to do
this
i personally use supermelo and i also
develop
a uh a project called dendro with a
couple of co-founders
you can find at denver.cloud if you want
to check it out but anyway it's
it's basically uh super mom's increment
incremental reading system we're trying
to make that more applicable and
add on some new idea or or more
accessible i mean to say an add-on some
new ideas there so
that's those are the two that i use but
the reason i use superman or instead of
something like anki
is because the algorithm is much better
and it has
incremental reading integrated with it
which we didn't get into incremental
reading today
but that is a very very interesting
thing as well and people here would be
interested in that
but anyway those are the two reasons why
i use super memory not anki
the algorithm difference for reviewing
the items is huge at least for me it's
it's at least two times as efficient so
those are my answers there i'd be
curious what james has to say about that
yeah yeah yeah um i guess i'll take it
in the reverse order as well the same
same old as you did so
in terms of what things to encode in the
uh space repetition system i think it
it's it's difficult to say and we we
have this conversation a lot
like me and zada are both part of a uh
a discord channel called the
supermemo.wiki discord channel where
uh it originally started as like a
supermemo uh focused discord channel but
now it's just become
more of like a general hangout for
people interested in space repetition
but
one of the main uh uh topics that we
discuss is like what's worth remembering
and um i think what i'd say just to you
now
just briefly is uh i think the most
important thing is to remember things
that you enjoy
that you will enjoy reviewing um because
it sounds like
you mentioned uh just before we started
recording that you you're a retired
programmer it sounds like you're
continuing to learn out of like
self-interest out of pleasure of
enjoyment because you enjoy learning it
would be
such a shame to um destroy that
uh by forcing yourself to sort of uh go
through this miserable
grind of every morning of doing your
repetitions and
feeling like you're a worker at the
flash card factory just hitting the
space bar and
hitting next repetition and so on so i
think
let pleasure be your guide and uh just
if you see something and you think
that's given me a good idea or that
that's such an interesting insight
um i think that makes it a good
candidate for
um formulating it as a flash card
because
if you in the moment you think oh that's
so interesting
it sort of suggests that you're going to
enjoy seeing it again over time it's
like uh
i think that's the best way to make sure
that your space repetition sessions stay
interesting and stay fun
and that will also um make you more
motivated to spend more time doing it
to spend more time learning and i think
that will just lead to you having good
results over time
you might notice that perhaps there's
like a
disconnect between things that are
applicable and useful and things that
you find interesting but
you can you can like address that down
the line i think
to begin with at least i'd recommend
that you just enjoy your learning yeah
for sure and then in terms of tools um
i use supermemo as well like xander but
i didn't start with super memory i
started with anki and i used that for
around four years
uh when i was in high school so that was
um
that was a good introduction to uh space
repetition
um and it's certainly reasonable to use
anki
i'm not like a two member elitist or
anything it's just
supermemo is better in a lot of ways
especially in terms of uh
incremental reading which uh yeah like
zander said we didn't get into it today
it's a whole nother presentation i have
got a video on it on my channel
experimental learning if you want to
watch that um oh that's fantastic video
yeah uh yeah so check that out if you
want to but
yeah there's a lot of information out
there about anki so it makes it more
easy to get into
there's a lot of add-ons i imagine
there'll be some sort of plug-in
integration with obsidian that would
allow you to
do some interoper interrupt between uh
obsidian and anki so perhaps that's a
good place to start
uh if you're if you're interested in
getting into this
yeah yeah i'm just gonna start with
superman
good thanks great uh great advice and
great talk appreciate it thank you
thank you paul thank you
i've got a couple of questions
the first is so using
using your advice from the previous
question you you choose
which information you want to put into
your
your deck your database um
but then on the card how do you decide
like which information should be the
prompt and
what you're going to answer like because
to some extent
putting some of the answer on the prompt
is like giving yourself a hint
but then you're not remembering as much
you know
um so that's my first question maybe we
can comment on that
and then um
[Music]
any recommendations on integrations with
obsidian
um because i've already got all this
stuff there so i'd
like to do as migration little possible
yeah yeah you want to take that james
yeah sure i'll quickly say something
about the integration with obsidian i'm
i've not personally used any of the
plugins that
um integrate obsidian and anki but i
know they exist
so that's the first place i go uh
actually i think brian jenks
possibly yeah yeah it's brian jenks he
has a video
uh that it's called like the state of
space repetition in
obsidian and he basically talks about
all of the different integration options
that you have for
doing space repetition in obsidian
through plugins or integrating with anki
as well so
definitely check that video out and then
you also ask a question about
structuring your prompts how to avoid
hints and stuff like that
um the uh the analogy that me and xander
have talked about before is like
uh you know prompt writing is very
difficult
and you almost have to train yourself
like an ai
on lots of data you need to
create lots of prompts realize which
ones work and which ones don't
and uh slowly sort of tune your your
prompt making model over time
to the point where you're making good uh
questionnaire cards but
just for some like general advice like
you can try and structure your prompts
in a way that
you like you can try and predict uh
either like the real life scenario
that would um that sort of matches the
prompt
you can try and match the prompts to a
real world scenario where you'd want to
recall
the information in the answer if you
know what i mean so
um that's one way to do it and also
um there's a really good classic guide
by
uh piotr wozniak called the 20 rules of
formulating knowledge
it's like the number one article on
you know uh designing uh flashcard
prompts i think right now that there's
very little writing about it in general
but
that's probably where i'd go and he has
some examples he he walks you through a
bunch of just
general heuristics for uh card making
um but i think xander probably has more
to say about this he's much more
interested in the formulation side of
things so
go ahead yeah and
well first of all on the on the obsidian
integration thing
i just want to mention james i don't
know if people are aware of this but
james has made
an incremental writing plug-in which is
obviously different from space
repetition but
in the more generalized way we were
talking about it in terms of a scheduler
it schedules your notes to come back to
you so you can imagine many scenarios
where you don't have
something new to add to a let's say an
idea right now
but maybe if you looked at it again in a
couple of weeks you would and so
orchestrating that manually is quite
difficult so james's plug-in
is meant to replicate a feature that
super mama has called incremental
writing
but it's in obsidian it's very well done
so that's one integration although it's
not perfectly
matching what we're talking about here
but anyway so that's that in terms of
the formulation
people that i i will essentially talk to
anybody
that wants to talk about this because
this has been an obsession of mine
for over half a decade i've thought
about this every single day of my life
and it not to demoralize anybody
but this took me a lot of thinking and
maybe i just
i was looking at it the wrong way or
there wasn't enough writing and in fact
i'm i'm hopeful now that if someone
started they could get to a level of
expertise
much more quickly given how much more
it's talked about
because i started thinking about this in
like 2014 i guess it's been even longer
than i thought
and there wasn't much people didn't
really even recognize this as an
important thing to optimize
so anyway i i don't think that that
should demoralize people in terms of how
long it took me
i think you can get there much more
quickly but it's a crucial point because
if you get this wrong you'll still
forget all of your items and it'll be a
slog
because a lot of beginners for example
they make space repetition prompts
henceforth i'll call them items just
because it's quicker they make items
that include multiple questions in them
essentially they
they they're asking themselves to recall
multiple pieces of information
and that can be very time consuming but
the the
worst part is that it's not effective at
all you need to uniformly activate
all of these synapses that are involved
in a particular memory
and if you're trying to spread the
activation across
multiple memories it's not going to
activate it well
and the strength increase in the memory
will not be as significant
and you'll probably forget the item over
time or
something which which peter bosniak
calls
pattern pattern matching or pattern
pattern extraction
something he calls pattern extraction
will occur which is
you review the item and you only
remember one piece of it or you
see it and you instantly remember that
one piece that's all you can
that's all you can know so anyway that's
the the point of what i'm saying is that
beginners make very many mistakes which
increase
the time consumption of reviewing items
increase the difficulty massively
and increase their forgetting of the
items in such a way that
they start to feel like this doesn't
work and sometimes you can even get this
scenario where
you're writing good items in the
in the syntactic sense you remember them
when you review them
but because they're not phrased in a
useful way or
like like ross mentioned they provide
too many hints
it can mean that when you encounter a
similar situation in life
you won't actually think of it because
the review
context doesn't match the real life
context so there's all kinds of problems
and it's
it's really really worth optimizing for
it like james mentioned there's an
article
by pierre wozniak called the 20 rules of
knowledge formulation or something like
this
there's also another one by him that was
written in the late 90s
which people barely talk about and to me
it's one of the best resources on this
in existence i don't know the exact
title but it's something it's got
knowledge structuring
in the title if you look at pyotr
wozniak knowledge structuring
you'll find it it's about economics the
items as an example are
are economics so you'll know if that's
the one but anyway those are two great
resources
a newer research which i think is
tremendous is andy matushak's article on
how to write good prompts i believe the
url for that is andy mc2.org
prompts so that would be a fantastic
resource and
if you're into this kind of thing he
integrates his system called orbit which
is essentially
you can embed space repetition items
into a page
and then review them so the article will
have one section
and then a bunch of prompts that he
wrote to help you remember the stuff in
that section
and then it'll email you whenever you
have items to review it's a
it's a really well done service and the
the core point
there is that not only is his article
very insightful but
he'll do the work for you of writing the
good prompts
about how to write good prompts so that
you can maintain that over time
so anyway those are some good resources
and also
if uh if anybody wants to talk about
this or actually
we we talked about this on the podcast a
lot so there that might be a useful
resource but also just
let me know i'll talk to anybody about
this because i think this is the crucial
skill
and if i can lend any expertise to
people i'm happy to do that
awesome thank you thanks for the answer
um so so
just what i took from that is um make
the
prompts like as real world applicable as
possible
so that right that that memory is
triggered like the most easily
and at least for me concert intuitively
i
i would think that giving multiple
different
questions or prompts would make it
easier but
it makes sense as you said that it would
like
fragment the activation of that
very interesting thank you yeah
absolutely
yeah actually since uh nobody has an
immediate huh do you have something to
say james correct oh no no you go ahead
go ahead
i'm just to say since nobody has an
immediate question i just want to
elaborate
like a couple of principles you can
follow is one that i stated there called
the minimum
information principle which is
essentially one question
should have each item should be about
one thing
and so that's one core point another
core point is to simplify the wording as
much as possible
when you're reviewing these prompts if
you have many of them to review let's
say 50 in a day or something like this
your attention is the core point so you
you need to simplify the wording as much
as possible to make sure that your
attention
your your concentration is always there
and
longer prompts with kind of convoluted
wording
can really dull that and make it make it
much harder to
to activate the memory properly so keep
them as short as possible keep them
about one thing
these kinds of things try to replicate
real life scenarios which often means
um you know getting rid of getting rid
of a lot of hint phrases
that that people use um
another thing and maybe maybe this is
what ross was getting at at some level
you can make redundant items so it's
phrased slightly differently
but it gets at the same underlying thing
and that can protect you against
forgetting somehow sometimes it can be
quicker to remember two or three items
about one thing than to remember one
because the fact that there are two or
three protects you from forgetting any
of them
and so once you forget an item once it
then has many more
repetitions because the algorithm knows
that you had trouble with it so
it can be much more time consuming all
that to say redundancy is a good thing
there
anyway those are some those are some
principles right away that would be
be hugely useful to employ
yeah um if anyone's got any more
questions go ahead
otherwise uh this has been a really fun
presentation and i guess we can call it
here
uh yeah yeah certainly if anybody has
any questions let us know but otherwise
thanks for uh thanks for having me guys
and thanks james for inviting me here i
certainly wasn't expecting this so this
was fun
um for james anzanda is there
um somewhere that people can contact you
if they've got
questions afterwards uh yeah
you can you can message me on twitter if
you want or
discord uh like james said we we
frequent this discord supermama.wiki so
you can find me on there if you want
my twitter is zdrks so you can find me
there
but yeah like i said i'm always happy to
talk about this anything surrounding
this
and yeah i would welcome that yeah i'm
the same way just discord or twitter at
experia learning
either one go ahead
awesome thanks and i'm actually going to
check out you guys's podcast i love some
podcasts awesome
awesome thank you yeah it'd be cool to
have on some uh obsidian pros as well we
haven't had like a
obsidian expert on at all before so uh
yeah that's the open invitation we gotta
we gotta get somebody on if
if any of you guys wanna wanna do it you
feel like you have something interesting
to say
let's uh let's do that yeah sounds like
a good collaboration
i'm sure you'll get some interest on the
on the discord
absolutely all right well this is uh
this is wonderful good talking to you
guys thanks again for having me
yeah thank you very much for coming yeah
thanks james thanks andrew